



AS
A MAN
THINKETH

by
James Allen





JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction ........................................................................ p. 3

Chapter 1. Thought and Character ...................................... p. 4

Chapter 2. Effect Of Thought On Circumstances ................ p. 6

Chapter 3. Effects Of Thoughts On Health And Body ........ p. 11

Chapter 4. Thought And Purpose ........................................ p. 13

Chapter 5. The Thought-Factor In Achievement ................ p. 15

Chapter 6. Visions And Ideals ............................................. p. 18

Chapter 7. Serenity .............................................................. p. 21

2

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

INTRODUCTION
—
Mind is the Master-power that molds and makes,
And Man is Mind, and evermore he takes
The tool of Thought, and, shaping what he wills
Brings forth a thousand joys, a thousand ills:-He thinks in secret, and it comes to pass:
Environment is but his looking-glass

This little volume (the result of meditation and experience is not intended as an
exhaustive treatise on the much-written-upon subject of the power of thought.
It is suggestive rather than explanatory, its object being to stimulate men and
women to the discovery and perception of the truth that--

“They themselves are makers of themselves”

by virtue of the thoughts which they choose and encourage; that mind is the master-weaver, both of the inner garment of character and the outer garment of circumstance, and that, as they may have hitherto woven in ignorance and pain they
may now weave in enlightenment and happiness.

James Allen

3

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Chapter 1
THOUGHT AND CHARACTER
—
The aphorism, “As a man thinketh in his heart so is he,” not only embraces the
whole of a man’s being, but is so comprehensive as to reach out to every condition
and circumstance of his life. A man is literally what he thinks, his character being
the complete sum of all his thoughts.
As the plant springs from, and could not be without, the seed, so every act of man
springs from the hidden seeds of thought, and could not have appeared without
them. This applies equally to those acts called “spontaneous” and “unpremeditated” as to those which are deliberately executed.
Act is the blossom of thought, and joy and suffering are its fruit; thus does a man
garner in the sweet and bitter fruitage of his own husbandry.
Man is a growth by law, and not a creation by artiﬁce, and cause and effect are as
absolute and undeviating in the hidden realm of thought as in the world of visible and material things. A noble and God-like character is not a thing of favor or
chance, but is the natural result of continued effort in right thinking, the effect of
long-cherished association with God-like thoughts. An ignoble and bestial character, by the same process, is the result of the continued harboring of groveling
thoughts.
Man is made or unmade by himself. In the armory of thought he forges the weapons by which he destroys himself. He also fashions the tools with which he builds
for himself heavenly mansions of joy and strength and peace. By the right choice
and true application of thought, man ascends to the divine perfection. By the
abuse and wrong application of thought he descends below the level of the beast.
Between these two extremes are all the grades of character, and man is their maker and master.
Of all the beautiful truths pertaining to the soul which have been restored and
brought to light in this age, none is more gladdening or fruitful of divine promise
and conﬁdence than this--that man is the master of thought, the molder of character, and the maker and shaper of condition, environment, and destiny.
As a being of power, intelligence, and love, and the lord of his own thoughts, man
holds key to every situation, and contains within himself that transforming and
regenerative agency by which he may make himself what he wills.
4

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Man is always the master, even in his weakest and most abandoned state. But in
his weakness and degradation he is a foolish master who misgoverns his “household.” When he begins to reﬂect upon his condition and search diligently for the
law upon which his being is established, he then becomes the wise master, directing his energies with intelligence and fashioning his thoughts to fruitful issues.
Such is the conscious master, and man can only thus become by discovering within himself the laws of thought. This discovery is totally a matter of application,
self-analysis and experience.
Only by much searching and mining are gold and diamonds obtained, and man
can ﬁnd every truth connected with his being, if he will dig deep into the mine
of his soul. That he is the maker of his character, the molder of his life, and the
builder of his destiny, he may unerringly prove, if he will watch, control, and alter
his thoughts, tracing their effects upon himself, upon others and upon his life
and circumstances, linking cause and effect by patient practice and investigation.
And utilizing his every experience, even the most trivial, everyday occurrence, as
a means of obtaining that knowledge of himself which is understanding, wisdom,
power. In this direction is the law of absolute that “He that seeketh ﬁndeth; and to
him that knocketh it shall be opened.” For only by patience, practice, and ceaseless importunity can a man enter the door of the temple of knowledge.

5

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Chapter 2
EFFECT OF THOUGHT ON CIRCUMSTANCES
—
A man’s mind may be likened to a garden, which may be intelligently cultivated
or allowed to run wild; but whether cultivated or neglected, it must, and will bring
forth. If no useful seeds are put into it, then an abundance of useless weed-seeds
will fall therein, and will continue to produce their kind.
Just as a gardener cultivates his plot, keeping it free from weeds, and growing the
ﬂowers and fruits which he requires so may a man tend the garden of his mind,
weeding out all the wrong, useless and impure thoughts, and cultivating toward
perfection the ﬂowers and fruits of right, useful and pure thoughts. By pursuing
this process, a man sooner or later discovers that he is the master-gardener of his
soul, the director of his life. He also reveals, within himself, the ﬂaws of thought,
and understands, with ever-increasing accuracy, how the thought-forces and
mind elements operate in the shaping of character, circumstances, and destiny.
Thought and character are one, and as character can only manifest and discover
itself through environment and circumstance, the outer conditions of a person’s
life will always be found to be harmoniously related to his inner state. This does
not mean that a man’s circumstances at any given time are an indication of his
entire character, but that those circumstances are so intimately connected with
some vital thought-element within himself that, for the time being, they are indispensable to his development.
Every man is where he is by the law of his being; the thoughts which he has built
into his character have brought him there, and in the arrangement of his life there
is no element of chance, but all is the result of a law which cannot err. This is just
as true of those who feel “out of harmony” with their surroundings as of those
who are contented with them.
As a progressive and evolving being, man is where he is that he may learn that he
may grow; and as he learns the spiritual lesson which any circumstance contains
for him, it passes away and gives place to other circumstances.
Man is buffeted by circumstances so long as he believes himself to be the creature
of outside conditions, but when he realizes that he is a creative power, and that he
may command the hidden soil and seeds of his being out of which circumstances
grow; he then becomes the rightful master of himself.

6

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

That circumstances grow out of thought every man knows who has for any length
of time practiced self-control and self-puriﬁcation, for he will have noticed that
the alteration in his circumstances has been in exact ratio with his altered mental
condition. So true is this that when a man earnestly applies himself to remedy the
defects in his character, and makes swift and marked progress, he passes rapidly
through a succession of vicissitudes.
The soul attracts that which it secretly harbors; that which it loves, and also that
which it fears; it reaches the height of its cherished aspirations; it falls to the level
of its unchastened desires and circumstances are the means by which the soul
receives it own.
Every thought-seed sown or allowed to fall into the mind, and to take root there,
produces its own, blossoming sooner or later into act, and bearing its own fruitage
of opportunity and circumstance. Good thoughts bear good fruit, bad thoughts
bad fruit.
The outer world of circumstances shapes itself to the inner world of thought, and
both pleasant and unpleasant external conditions are factors which make for the
ultimate good of the individual. As the reaper of his own harvest, man learns both
of suffering and bliss.
Following the inmost desires, aspirations, thoughts, by which he allows himself
to be dominated (pursuing the will-o’-the wisps of impure imaginings or steadfastly walking the highway of strong and high endeavor), a man at last arrives at
their fruition and fulﬁllment in the outer conditions of his life. The laws of growth
and adjustment everywhere obtain.
A man does not come to the alms-house or the jail by the tyranny of fate or circumstance, but by the pathway of grovelling thoughts and base desires. Nor does
a pure-minded man fall suddenly into crime by stress of any mere external force;
the criminal thought had long been secretly fostered in the heart, and the hour of
opportunity revealed its gathered power. Circumstance does not make the man;
it reveals him to himself. No such conditions can exist as descending into vice and
its attendant sufferings apart from vicious inclinations, or ascending into virtue
and its pure happiness without the continued cultivation of virtuous aspirations;
and man, therefore, as the lord and master of thought, is the maker of himself and
the shaper of and author of environment. Even at birth the soul comes of its own
and through every step of its earthly pilgrimage it attracts those combinations of
conditions which reveal itself, which are the reﬂections of its own purity and impurity, its strength and weakness.

7

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Men do not attract that which they want, but that which they are. Their whims,
fancies, and ambitions are thwarted at every step, but their inmost thoughts and
desires are fed with their own food, be it foul or clean. Man is manacled only by
himself; thought and action are the jailors of Fate--they imprison, being base; they
are also the angels of Freedom--they liberate, being noble. Not what he wished
and prays for does a man get, but what he justly earns. His wishes and prayers are
only gratiﬁed and answered when they harmonize with his thoughts and actions.
In the light of this truth what, then, is the meaning of “ﬁghting against circumstances”? It means that a man is continually revolting against an effect without,
while all the time he is nourishing and preserving its cause in his heart. That
cause may take the form of a conscious vice or an unconscious weakness; but
whatever it is, it stubbornly retards the efforts of it possessor, and thus calls aloud
for remedy.
Men are anxious to improve their circumstances, but are unwilling to improve
themselves; they therefore remain bound. The man who does not shrink from
self-cruciﬁxion can never fail to accomplish the object upon which his heart is set.
This is as true of earthly as of heavenly things. Even the man whose sole object is
to acquire wealth must be prepared to make great personal sacriﬁces before he
can accomplish his object; and how much more so he who would realize a strong
and well-poised life?
It is pleasing to human vanity to believe that one suffers because of one’s virtue;
but not until a man has extirpated every sickly, bitter, and impure thought from
his soul, can he be in a position to know and declare that his sufferings are the
result of his good, and not of his bad qualities; and on the way to, yet long before
he has reached that supreme perfection , he will have found, working in his mind
and life, the great law which is absolutely just, and which cannot, therefore, give
good for evil, evil for good. Possessed of such knowledge, he will then know, looking back upon his past ignorance and blindness, that his life is, and always was,
justly ordered, and that all his past experiences, good and bad, were the equitable
outworking of his evolving, yet unevolved self.
Good thoughts and actions can never produce bad results; bad thoughts and actions can never produce good results. This is but saying that nothing can come
from corn but corn, nothing from nettles but nettles. Men understand this law
in the natural world, and work with it; but few understand it in the mental and
moral world (though its operation there is just as simple and undeviating), and
they, therefore, do not cooperate with it.

8

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Suffering is always the effect of wrong thought in some direction. It is an indication that the individual is out of harmony with himself, with the law of his being.
The sole and supreme use of suffering is to purify, to burn out all that is useless
and impure. Suffering ceases for him who is pure. There could be no object in
burning gold after the dross had been removed, and a perfectly pure and enlightened being could not suffer.
The circumstances which a man encounters with suffering are the result of his own
mental inharmony. The circumstances which a man encounters with blessedness
are the result of his own mental harmony. Blessedness, not material possessions,
is the measure of right thought; wretchedness, not lack of material possessions, is
the measure of wrong thought. A man may be cursed and rich; he may be blessed
and poor. Blessedness and riches are only joined together when the riches are
rightly and wisely used. And the poor man only descends into wretchedness when
he regards his lot as a burden unjustly imposed.
Indigence and indulgence are the two extremes of wretchedness. They are both
equally unnatural and the result of mental disorder. A man is not rightly conditioned until he is a happy, healthy, and prosperous being; and happiness, health,
and prosperity are the result of a harmonious adjustment of the inner with the
outer of the man with his surroundings.
A man only begins to be a man when he ceases to whine and revile, and commences to search for the hidden justice which regulates his life. And he adapts his
mind to that regulating factor, he ceases to accuse others as the cause of his condition, and builds himself up in strong and noble thoughts; ceases to kick against
circumstances, but beings to use them as aids to his more rapid progress, and as
a means of discovering the hidden powers and possibilities within himself.
Law, not confusion, is the dominating principle in the universe; justice, not injustice, is the soul and substance of life. Righteousness, not corruption, is the molding and moving force in the spiritual government of the world. This being so, man
has but to right himself to ﬁnd that the universe is right. And during the process
of putting himself right, he will ﬁnd that as he alters his thoughts towards things
and other people, things and other people will alter towards him.
The proof of this truth is in every person, and it therefore admits of easy investigation by systematic introspection and self-analysis. Let a man radically alter his
thoughts, and he will be astonished at the rapid transformation it will effect in the
material conditions of his life. Men imagine that thought can be kept secret, but
it cannot. It rapidly crystallizes into habit, and habit solidiﬁes into circumstance.
Bestial thoughts crystallize into habits of drunkenness and sensuality, which so-

9

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

lidify into circumstances of destitution and disease. Impure thoughts of every
kind crystallize into enervating and confusing habits, which solidify into distracting and adverse circumstances. Thoughts of fear, doubt, and indecision crystallize into weak, unmanly, and irresolute habits, which solidify into circumstances
of failure, indigence, and slavish dependence. Lazy thoughts crystallize into weak,
habits of uncleanliness and dishonesty, which solidify into circumstances of foulness and beggary. Hateful and condemnatory thoughts crystallize into habits of
accusation and violence, which solidify into circumstances of injury and persecution. Selﬁsh thoughts of all kinds crystallize into habits of self-seeking, which
solidify into distressful circumstances.
On the other hand, beautiful thoughts of all kinds crystallize into habits of grace
and kindliness, which solidify into genial and sunny circumstances. Pure thoughts
crystallize into habits of temperance and self-control, which solidify into circumstances of repose and peace. Thoughts of courage, self-reliance, and decision crystallize into manly habits, which solidify into circumstances of success,
plenty, and freedom. Energetic thoughts crystallize into habits of cleanliness and
industry, which solidify into circumstances of pleasantness. Gentle and forgiving
thoughts crystallize into habits of gentleness, which solidify into protective and
preservative circumstances. Loving and unselﬁsh thoughts which solidify into
circumstances of sure and abiding prosperity and true riches.
A particular train of thought persisted in, be it good or bad, cannot fail to produce
its results on the character and circumstances. A man cannot directly choose his
circumstances, but he can choose his thoughts, and so indirectly, yet surely, shape
his circumstances. Nature helps every man to gratiﬁcation of the thoughts which
he most encourages, and opportunities are presented which will most speedily
bring to the surface both the good and the evil thoughts.
Let a man cease from his sinful thoughts, and all the world will soften towards
him, and be ready to help him. Let him put away his weakly and sickly thoughts,
and the opportunities will spring up on every hand to aid his strong resolves. Let
him encourage good thoughts, and no hard fate shall bind him down to wretchedness and shame. The world is your kaleidoscope, and the varying combinations
of colors which at every succeeding moment it presents to you are the exquisitely
adjusted pictures of your ever-moving thoughts.

10

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Chapter 3
EFFECTS OF THOUGHTS ON HEALTH AND BODY
—
The body is the servant of the mind. It obeys the operations of the mind, whether
they be deliberately chosen or automatically expressed. At the bidding of unlawful thoughts the body sinks rapidly into disease and decay; at the command of
glad and beautiful thoughts it becomes clothed with youthfulness and beauty.
Disease and health, like circumstances, are rooted in thought. Sickly thoughts
will express themselves through a sickly body. Thoughts of fear have been known
to kill a man as speedily as a bullet and they are continually killing thousands of
people just as surely though less rapidly. The people who live in fear of disease
are the people who get it. Anxiety quickly demoralizes the whole body, and lays
it open to the entrance of disease; while impure thoughts, even if not physically
indulged, will sooner shatter the nervous system.
Strong pure, and happy thoughts build up the body in vigor and grace. The body
is a delicate and plastic instrument, which responds readily to the thoughts by
which it is impressed, and habits of thought will produce their own effects, good
or bad, upon it.
Men will continue to have impure and poisoned blood, so long as they propagate
unclean thoughts. Out of a clean heart comes a clean life and a clean body. Out of
a deﬁled mind proceeds a deﬁled life and a corrupt body. Thought is the fount of
action, life and manifestation; make the fountain pure, and all will be pure.
Change of diet will not help a man who will not change his thoughts. When a man
makes his thoughts pure, he no longer desires impure food.
Clean thoughts make clean habits. The so-called saint who does not wash his
body is not a saint. He who has strengthened and puriﬁed his thoughts does not
need to consider the malevolent.
If you would perfect your body, guard your mind. If you would renew your body,
beautify your mind. Thoughts of malice, envy, and disappointment, despondency, rob the body of its health and grace. A sour face does not come by chance; it is
made by sour thoughts. Wrinkles that mar are drawn by folly, passion, pride.

11

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

I know a woman of ninety-six who has the bright, innocent face of a girl. I know
a man well under middle age whose face is drawn into in harmonious contours.
The one is the result of a sweet and sunny disposition; the other is the outcome of
passion and discontent.
As you cannot have a sweet and wholesome abode unless you admit the air and
sunshine freely into your rooms, so a strong body and a bright, happy, or serene
countenance can only result from the free admittance into the mind of thoughts
of joy and goodwill and serenity.
On the faces of the aged there are wrinkles made by sympathy others by strong and
pure thought, and others are carved by passion; who cannot distinguish them?
With those who have lived righteously, age is calm, peaceful, and softly mellowed,
like the setting sun. I have recently seen a philosopher on his deathbed. He was
not old except in years. He died as sweetly and peacefully as he had lived.
There is no physician like cheerful thought for dissipating the ills of the body;
there is no comforter to compare with goodwill for dispersing the shadows of
grief and sorrow. To live continually in thoughs of ill will, cynicism, suspicion,
and envy, is to be conﬁned in a self-made prison hole. But to think well of all, to be
cheerful with all, to patiently learn to ﬁnd the good in all--such unselﬁsh thoughts
are the very portals of heaven; and to dwell day by day in thoughts of peace toward every creature will bring abounding peace to their possessor.

12

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Chapter 4
THOUGHT AND PURPOSE
—
Until thought is linked with purpose there is no intelligent accomplishment. With
the majority the bark of thought is allowed to “drift” upon the ocean of life. Aimlessness is a vice, and such drifting must not continue for him who would street
clear of catastrophe and destruction.
They who have no central purpose in their life fall an easy prey to petty worries, fears, troubles, and self-pityings, all of which are indications of weakness,
which lead, just as surely as deliberately planned sins (though by a diff route), to
failure, unhappiness, and loss, for weakness cannot persist in a power-evolving
universe.
A man should conceive of a legitimate purpose in his heart, and set out to accomplish it. He should make this purpose the centralizing point of his thoughts.
It may take the form of a spiritual ideal, or it may be a worldly object, according to his nature at the time being. Whichever it is, he should steadily focus his
thought-forces upon the object he had set before him. He should make this purpose his supreme duty and should devote himself to its attainment, not allowing
his thoughts to wander away into ephemeral fancies, longings, and imaginings.
This is the royal road to self-control and true concentration of thought. Even if
he fails again and again to accomplish his purpose--as he must until weakness is
overcome--the strength of character gained will be the measure of his true success, and this will form a new starting point for future power and triumph.
Those who are not prepared for the apprehension of a great purpose, should ﬁx
the thoughts upon the faultless performance of their duty, no matter how insigniﬁcant their task may appear. Only in this way can the thoughts be gathered
and focussed, and resolution and energy be developed. Once this is done, there
is nothing which may not be accomplished. The weakest soul knowing its own
weakness, and believing this truth--that strength can only be developed by effort
and practice--will, thus believing, at once begin to exert itself. And, adding effort
to effort, patience to patience, and strength to strength, will never cease to develop and will at last grow divinely strong. As the physically weak man can make
himself strong by careful and patient training, so the man of weak thoughts can
make them strong by exercising himself in right thinking.

13

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

To put away aimlessness and weakness and to begin to think with purpose is to
enter the ranks of those strong ones who only recognize failure as one of the pathways to attainment. Who make all conditions serve them, and who think strongly,
attempt fearlessly, and accomplish masterfully.
Having conceived of his purpose, a man should mentally mark out a straight
pathway to its achievement, looking neither to the right nor left. Doubts and fears
should be rigorously excluded. They are disintegrating elements which break up
the straight line of effort, rendering it crooked, ineffectual, useless. Thoughts of
doubt and fear can never accomplish anything. They always lead to failure. Purpose, energy, power to do, and all strong thoughts cease when doubt and fear
creep in.
The will to do springs from the knowledge that we can do. Doubt and fear are
the great enemies of knowledge, and he who encourages them, who does not slay
them, thwarts himself at every step.
He who has conquered doubt and fear has conquered failure. His every thought is
allied with power, and all difﬁculties are bravely met and overcome. His purposes
are seasonably planted, and they bloom and bring forth fruit that does not fall
prematurely to the ground.
Thought allied fearlessly to purpose becomes creative force. He who knows this
is ready to become something higher and stronger than a bundle of wavering
thoughts and ﬂuctuating sensations. He who does this has become the conscious
and intelligent wielder of his mental powers.

14

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Chapter 5
THE THOUGHT-FACTOR IN ACHIEVEMENT
—
All that a man achieves and all that he fails to achieve is the direct result of his
own thoughts. In a justly ordered universe, where loss of equipoise would mean
total destruction, individual responsibility must be absolute. A man’s weakness
and strength, purity and impurity, are his own and not another man’s. They are
brought about by himself and not by another; and they can only be altered by
himself, never by another. His condition is also his own, and not another man’s.
His sufferings and his happiness are evolved from within. As he thinks, so is he;
as he continues to think, so he remains.
A strong man cannot help a weaker unless that weaker is willing to be helped.
And even then the weak man must become strong of himself. He must, by his own
efforts, develop the strength which he admires in another. None but himself can
alter his condition.
It has been usual for men to think and to say, “Many men are slaves because one
is an oppressor; let us hate the oppressor!” But there is amongst an increasing few
a tendency to reverse this judgment and to say, “One man is an oppressor because
many are slaves; let us despise the slaves.”
The truth is that oppressor and slaves are cooperators in ignorance, and, while
seeming to afﬂict each other, are in reality, afﬂicting themselves. A perfect knowledge perceives the action of law in the weakness of the oppressed and the misapplied power of the oppressor. A perfect love, seeing the suffering which both
states entail, condemns neither; a perfect compassion embraces both oppressor
and oppressed. He who has conquered weakness and has pushed away all selﬁsh
thoughts belongs neither to oppressor nor oppressed. He is free.
A man can only rise, conquer, and achieve by lifting up his thoughts. He can only
remain weak, abject, and miserably by refusing to lift up his thoughts.
Before a man can achieve anything, even in worldly things, he must lift his thoughts
above slavish animal indulgence. He may not, in order to succeed, give up all animality and selﬁshness, necessarily, but a portion of it must, at least, be sacriﬁced.
A man whose ﬁrst thought is bestial indulgence could neither think clearly nor
plan methodically. He could not ﬁnd and develop his latent resources and would
fail in any undertaking. Not having begun to manfully control his thoughts, he is

15

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

not in a position to control affairs and to adopt serious responsibilities. He is not
ﬁt to act independently and stand alone. But he is limited only by the thoughts
that he chooses.
There can be no progress nor achievement without sacriﬁce, and a man’s worldly
success will be by the measure that he sacriﬁces his confused animal thoughts,
and ﬁxes his mind on the development of his plans, and the strengthening of his
resolution and self-reliance. The higher his he lifts his thoughts, the greater will
be his success, the more blessed and enduring will be his achievements.
The universe does not favor the greedy, the dishonest, the vicious... although on
the mere surface it sometimes may appear to do so. It helps the honest, the magnanimous, the virtuous. All the great teachers of the ages have declared this in
varying ways, and to prove it and to know it a man has but to persist in making
himself increasingly virtuous by lifting his thoughts.
Intellectual achievements are the result of thought consecrated to the search for
knowledge or for the beautiful and true in nature. Such achievements may sometimes be connected with vanity and ambition, but they are not the outcome of
those characteristics. They are the natural outgrowth of long and arduous effort,
and of pure and unselﬁsh thoughts.
Spiritual achievements are the consummation of holy aspirations. He who lives
constantly in the conception of noble and lofty thoughts, who dwells upon all that
is pure and selﬂess, will, as surely as the sun reaches its zenith and the moon its
full, become wise and noble in character and rise into a position of inﬂuence and
blessedness.
Achievement of any kind is the crown of effort, the diadem of thought. By the
aid of self-control, resolution, purity, righteousness, and well-directed thought a
man ascends. By the aid of animality, indolence, impurity, corruption, and confusion of thought a man descends.
A man may rise to high success in the world, even to lofty attitudes in the spiritual
realm, and again descend into weakness and wretchedness by allowing arrogant,
selﬁsh, and corrupt thoughts to take possession of him.
Victories attained by right thought can be maintained only by watchfulness. Many
give way when success is assured, and rapidly fall back into failure.
All achievements, whether in the business, intellectual, or spiritual world, are the
result of deﬁnitely directed thought, are governed by the same law, and are of the
same method. The only difference is in the object of attainment.
16

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

He who would accomplish little need sacriﬁce little; he would would achieve much
must sacriﬁce much. He who would attain highly must sacriﬁce greatly.

17

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Chapter 6
VISIONS AND IDEALS
—
The dreamers are the saviors of the world. As the visible world is sustained by the
invisible, so men, through all their trials and sins and sordid vocations, are nourished by the beautiful visions of their solitary dreamers. Humanity cannot forget
its dreamers; it cannot let their ideals fade and die; it lives in them; it knows them
as the realities which it shall one day see and know.
Composer, sculptor, painter, poet, prophet, sage--these are the makers of the
after-world, the architects of heaven. The world is beautiful because they have
lived. Without them, laboring humanity would perish.
He who cherishes a beautiful vision, a lofty ideal in his heart, will one day realize
it. Columbus cherished a vision of another world and he discovered it. Copernicus fostered the vision of a multiplicity of worlds and a wider universe, and he
revealed it. Buddha beheld the vision of a spiritual world of stainless beauty and
perfect peace, and he entered into it.
Cherish your visions; cherish your ideals. Cherish the music that stirs in your
heart, the beauty that forms in your mind, the loveliness that drapes your purest
thoughts. For out of them will grow all delightful conditions, all heavenly environment; of these, if you but remain true to them, your world will at last be built.
To desire is to obtain; to aspire is to achieve. Shall man’s basest desires receive
the fullest measure of gratiﬁcation, and his purest aspirations starve for lack of
sustenance? Such is not the Law. Such a condition can never obtain: “Ask and
receive.”
Dream lofty dreams, and as you dream, so shall you become. Your vision is the
promise of what you shall one day be; your ideal is the prophecy of what you shall
at last unveil.
The greatest achievement was at ﬁrst and for a time a dream. The oak sleeps in
the acorn; the bird waits in the egg. And in the highest vision of a soul a waking
angle stirs. Dreams are the seedlings of realities.
Your circumstances may be uncongenial, but they shall not remain so if you only
perceive an ideal and strive to reach it. You can’t travel within and stand still

18

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

without. Here is a youth hard pressed by poverty and labor. Conﬁned long hours
in an unhealthy workshop; unschooled and lacking all the arts of reﬁnement. But
he dreams of better things. He thinks of intelligence, or reﬁnement, of grace and
beauty. He conceives of, mentally builds up, an ideal condition of life. The wider
liberty and a larger scope takes possession of him; unrest urges him to action, and
he uses all his spare times and means to the development of his latent powers and
resources. Very soon so altered has his mind become that the workshop can no
longer hold him. It has become so out of harmony with his mind-set that it falls
out of his life as a garment is cast aside. And with the growth of opportunities
that ﬁt the scope of his expanding powers, he passes out of it altogether. Years
later we see this youth as a grown man. We ﬁnd him a master of certain forces of
the mind that he wields with worldwide inﬂuence and almost unequaled power.
In his hands he holds the cords of gigantic responsibilities; he speaks and lives
are changed; men and women hang upon his words and remold their characters.
Sun-like, he becomes the ﬁxed and luminous center around which innumerable
destinies revolve. He has become the vision of his youth. He has become one with
his ideal.
And you too, youthful reader, will realize the vision (not just the idle wish) of your
heart, be it base or beautiful, or a mixture of both. For you will always gravitate
toward that which you, secretly, most love. Into your hands will be placed the exact results of your own thoughts. You will receive that which you earn; no more,
no less. Whatever your present environment may be, you will fall, remain, or rise
with your thoughts--your vision, your ideal. You will become as small as your
controlling desire; as great as your dominant aspiration.
The thoughtless, the ignorant, and the indolent, seeing only the apparent effects of
things and not the things themselves, talk of luck, of fortune, and chance. Seeing
a man grow rich, they say, “How lucky he is!” Observing another become skilled
intellectually, they exclaim, “How highly favored he is!” And noting the saintly
character and wide inﬂuence of another, they remark, “How chance helps him at
every turn!” They do not see the trials and failures and struggles which these men
have encountered in order to gain their experience. They have no knowledge of
the sacriﬁces they have made, of the undaunted efforts they have put forth, of the
faith they have exercised so that they might overcome the apparently insurmountable and realize the vision of their heart. They do not know the darkness and the
heartaches; they only see the light and joy, and call it “luck.” Do not see the long,
arduous journey, but only behold the pleasant goal and call it “good fortune.” Do
not understand the process, but only perceive the result, and call it “chance.”
In all human affairs there are efforts, and there are results. The strength of the
effort is the measure of the result. Change is not. Gifts, powers, material, intel-

19

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

lectual and spiritual possessions are the fruits of effort. They are thoughts completed, objectives accomplished, visions realized.
The vision that you glorify in your mind, the ideal that you enthrone in your heart-this you will build your life by; this you will become.

20

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Chapter 7
SERENITY
—
Calmness of mind is one of the beautiful jewels of wisdom. It is the result of long
and patient effort in self-control. Its presence is an indication of ripened experience, and of a more than ordinary knowledge of the laws and operations of
thought.
A man becomes calm in the measure that he understands himself as a thoughtevolved being. For such knowledge necessitates the understanding of others as
the result of thought, and as he develops a right understanding, and sees ever
more clearly the internal relations of things by the action of cause and effect, he
ceases to fuss, fume, worry, and grieve. He remains poised, steadfast, serene.
The calm man, having learned how to govern himself, knows how to adapt himself
to others. And they, in turn reverence his spiritual strength. They feel that they
can learn from him and rely upon him. The more tranquil a man becomes, the
greater is his success, his inﬂuence, his power for good. Even the ordinary trader
will ﬁnd his business prosperity increase as he develops a greater self-control and
equanimity, for people will always prefer to deal with a man whose demeanor is
equitable.
The strong, calm man is always loved and revered. He is like a shade-giving tree in
a thirsty land, or a sheltering rock in a storm. Who does not love a tranquil heart?
a sweet-tempered, balanced life? It does not matter whether it rains or shines,
or what changes come to those who possess these blessings for they are always
serene and calm. That exquisite poise of character that we call serenity is the last
lesson of culture. It is the ﬂowering of life, the fruitage of the soul. It is precious
as wisdom--more desirable than ﬁne gold. How insigniﬁcant mere money-seeking looks in comparison with a serene life. A life that dwells in the ocean of truth,
beneath the waves, beyond the reach of the tempests, in the eternal calm!
How many people we know who sour their lives, who ruin all that is sweet and
beautiful by explosive tempers, who destroy their poise of character and make
bad blood! It is a question whether the great majority of people do not ruin their
lives and mar their happiness by lack of self-control. How few people we meet in
life who are well balanced, who have that exquisite poise which is characteristic
of the ﬁnished character.”

21

JAMES ALLEN

AS A MAN THINKETH

Yes, humanity surges with uncontrolled passion, is tumultuous with ungoverned
grief, is blown about by anxiety and doubt. Only the wise man, only he whose
thoughts are controlled and puriﬁed, makes the winds and the storms of the soul
obey him.
Tempest-tossed souls, wherever you may be, under whatever conditions you
may live, know this: In the ocean of life the isles of blessedness are smiling and
the sunny shore of your ideal awaits your coming. Keep your hands ﬁrmly upon
the helm of thought. In the core of your soul reclines the commanding Master;
He does but sleep; wake Him. Self-control is strength. Right thought is mastery.
Calmness is power. Say unto your heart, “Peace. Be still.”

THE END

22

